 
  <b>Note:</b> Federation is still in active development, so this
  document could be out of date. This may not describe the game
  perfectly in its latest state.

  <h1>ABOUT FEDERATION</h1>
  Federation is a massively multiplayer online turn-based strategy
  (MMOTBS) with a science fiction theme and utilizing a 2D hex-based
  game map. The game has slow-playing, simultaneous turns, intended
  for once-a-day gameplay. The game universe and play style is
  designed so that perpetual or long-term gameplay is possible on the
  servers. Some (such as the deathmatch server) will have periodic
  resets based on time or victory conditions. The main server should
  theoretically be able to have perpetual gameplay without any resets.
  Players can control planets, moons, and regions of asteroid fields
  within a given star system. Sectors consist of a large number of
  star systems and each game server will have at least one
  sector. Spaceships can be grouped into fleets, and fleets can belong
  to a player or a federation of many players that players can form
  among themselves.

  <h1>TECHNICAL DETAILS</h1>
  The server back-end of Federation will initially be coded in Python
  and there will be a public API using JSON. The source code will be
  hosted on Github under the AGPL license, but there will be several
  official servers hosted by the Federation project. The API will be
  open, allowing anyone to be able to write a game client that can
  authenticate with the servers, retrieve the game state from the
  servers, and send moves back to the server. The official way of
  accessing and playing the game will initially be through the
  official website via any HTML 5 capable browser, but flexibility is
  intended so that mobile and desktop apps will be eventually be
  released. Because of the open nature of the game, unofficial clients
  and servers are possible.

  <h1>PLANNED OFFICIAL SERVERS</h1>
  Initially, there will be three official game servers with different
  initial settings so that different play styles can be
  accommodated. The main server will be a slow-playing server with a
  large sector, enabling perpetual gameplay that requires checking
  about once a day to be successful. In addition, there will be a
  competitive deathmatch server with tweaked settings that plays more
  quickly, is on a much smaller sector, and will reset every three
  months or if a federation manages to conquer the entire sector and
  hence "win" the game. Finally, there will be a bots-allowed server
  that is a varient of the deathmatch gameplay so that people can
  write automated clients to play the game in an environment intended
  so that the best AI can win. Bots will not be allowed on the other
  official servers. There will also be a semi-official development
  server that tests changes before they are pushed onto the main
  servers.

  All official servers will eventually (after alpha is completed) have
  two sectors. The starting sector will take place in a safe galaxy
  where newbies can complete missions and learn how to play the game
  without the risk of PvP against other players ruining their
  fun. Economic growth will be slower because ownership of territory
  and membership in federations will not be supported. The second
  sector is accessible through a one-way hyperspace jumpgate. This
  second sector allows full utilization of the game features: PvP is
  allowed, ownership of territory is allowed, and players can form
  federations with each other. Players will never be forced into the
  second sector, but economic growth potential is much greater in the
  second sector, so there will be strong incentives to utilize the
  full features of the game by making the one-way jump. If a player is
  completely eliminated, with no ships or territory remaining, they
  will be able to restart in the original sector and build again from
  scratch.

  <h1>BASIC GAMEPLAY</h1>
  In Federation, spaceships are completely modular and consist
  entirely of components. Players can buy, sell, or upgrade
  components, although different ship types may have different
  component slots or might have certain unsellable components "locked"
  to their ship. There will be small ships (such as fighters and
  bombers), medium ships (frigates), and large ships (various forms of
  capital ships) that all have various advantages and disadvantages as
  a ship class. Ship types themselves are simply variations of the
  basic ship frame with different starting components. It's entirely
  possible to, if the components are available, turn one ship type
  into another ship type of the same size by buying and selling the
  necessary components.

  Because different ships have different advantages and disadvantages,
  forming a fleet to balance out the ships is recommended. Any player
  can put their ships in a fleet that they own. Fleets will move as
  quickly as the slowest ship in the fleet, and large gatherings of
  ships will be visible by enemies from further away in servers where
  fog of war is enabled. Because of the lack of a hyperspace drive,
  small ships are unable to travel between star systems unless they
  are docked in a ship with a docking bay. They will undock if the
  fleet enters into combat.

  Players who are in federations will be able to participate in fleets
  owned by their federation and will be able to join and leave at any
  time as long as they remain part of that federation. Only two
  players can actually control the fleet (a commander and a deputy)
  and everyone else is a passive passenger until they choose to leave
  that fleet.  With federations, players are able to create much
  larger fleets than they would otherwise be able to, so social play
  is encouraged. It also allows people from different time zones to
  continuously guard friendly territory in shifts.

  There are several layers of maps. The furthest level of the game map
  is the sector view, which allows the player to view all star systems
  as well as large fleets that are moving between star systems. Fleets
  and ships that are in betewen star systems will be unable to engage
  in combat because they are locked into the fastest type of
  faster-than-light (FTL) travel and are locked onto their given
  destination. All action will take place within a given star system.

  A star system consists of a 2D representation on a hex map. The star
  is typically near the center of the star system (star systems with
  more than one star have more complicated physics). The only other
  important objects in a star system are the asteroid fields, the
  planets, and the moons. Planets revolve around the star(s), moons
  revolve around a planet, and asteroid fields typically are
  one-hex-large sectors of a larger asteroid belt that encircle a star
  at some orbital distance. Ships in star systems are engaged in a
  slower mode of faster-than-light travel unless they are near a local
  object of significance, such as a planet or an asteroid field.
  
  The closest level of maps is the tactical view. This centers around
  an object of importance, such as an asteroid field or a planet and
  its moons. Here, fleets can position themselves without needing to
  enter hyperspace; can fight other ships; can bombard asteroids,
  moons; and can dock. Players can also set up stationary platforms to
  defend their bases within a certain range. Menus on territory,
  spacecraft, and other significant areas can also provide various
  forms of interaction and economic development.

  Planets and moons are ownable by players. The player that owns the
  planet or moon can launch various orbital stations around the
  object. Friendly fleets and space platforms around the planet are
  safer than in deep space. The player can build certain settlements
  on the surface (for solid planets) or in the atmosphere (for gas
  planets) that can provide a source of moderate economic revenue.

  Asteroid fields are a special type of object because they obstruct
  movement and visibility. Unless the player owns an asteroid field,
  has an ally that owns the asteroid field, or is nearby the asteroid
  field, ownership of the territory is unknown. Spacecraft and space
  platforms can hide more easily in the asteroid field and are given a
  defensive advantage if they are being attacked from outside of the
  asteroid field. Because of the difficulty of asteroid fields, star
  systems with many asteroid fields are great for guerilla warfare
  against a superior foe.

  Asteroids are economically advantageous and can be mined by special
  spacecraft and refined in an asteroid base. Refined asteroids can
  either be sold directly at the base or transported further away. The
  value of refined asteroids is based on the distance of where they
  are being sold from the nearest asteroid field.

  <h1>MANY WAYS TO PLAY</h1>
  Players will be able to form federations and federations will be
  able to ally each other and declare war on each other. Players in a
  federation will be unable to attack a federation or the allies of
  that federation without first leaving that federation. Federations
  will be able to form interplayer fleets (as described in the FLEET)
  section. Most of the features federations will be able to utilize
  will be options that the federation's government can determine, thus
  allowing both loose coalitions and strong, centralized governance
  with optional features available such as a mandatory membership fee
  or shared vision. Players and federations will be able to place
  monetary bounties on players in general, or on particular ships,
  fleets, or planetary bodies that are owned by a player. A major
  focus on Federation will be social gameplay and membership in
  federations is strongly encouraged to experience the full features
  of the game. You are rewarded for getting your friends to join the
  game because friends can join your fleet, thus providing strength in
  numbers.

  Players will be able to, through special events or by purchase with
  real life money, obtain research points that can be spent on
  technologies. Most technologies unlock certain special components
  that can then be purchased for the player's spacecraft. Like in-game
  currency, players can trade research points. Players who are donors
  to the game (to help pay server bills) will also receive a certain
  amount of research points at the beginning of each month for as long
  as they are a donor. To be fair for the players who do not have much
  real life money, the components you can obtain through research will
  not provide an unfair in-game advantage. There will be
  always-available components of roughly equivalent stats. The purpose
  of selling research points is to provide some incentive for those to
  help with game development costs and server bills, not to be unfair
  on those unable or unwilling to spend money on a free game.

  Federation, unlike many traditional strategy games, is designed so
  that there is a multiplicity of gameplay styles possible on the main
  server. One can choose one or more of several ways to play the
  game. One can build galactic empires and try to conquer many regions
  of the sector, but that is not necessarily the best way to
  play. Players can instead focus on optimizing their economic
  strength, on being bounty hunters, on inter-player trade, or even on
  being pirates. Because refined asteroids can be shipped to far-away
  bases for higher economic profit, players can try to intercept these
  trade convoys, take control of the ships via boarding, and then sell
  those refined asteroids themselves without having to actually mine
  asteroids. Asteroids enable asymetrical warfare by providing an
  economically-valuable hiding place and ample defensive
  opportunity. The strongest player on paper will not necessarily win
  every war because this is a strategy game, not a level grinding
  game.
